ZIP 315: Initial draft (#607)
zcash/zips: zip-0315.rst

          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@electriccoin.co>
  Credits: Francisco Gindre
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Wallet
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/447>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/>

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Auto-shielding
    The process of automatically transferring transparent funds to the most recent
    shielded pool on receipt.

Opportunistic shielding
    The process of transferring previously received transparent funds to the most
    recent shielded pool as part of a user-initiated transaction.

Auto-migration
    The process of automatically transferring shielded funds from older pools to the
    most preferred (usually the most recent) pool on receipt.

Opportunistic migration
    The process of transferring previously received shielded funds from older pools
    to the most preferred (usually the most recent) pool as part of a user-initiated
    transaction.

> Transaction output (TXO)
>     An output (transparent TXO or note) of a transaction on the consensus block chain
>     or in the mempool visible to a wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction output (TXO)
    An output (transparent coin or shielded note) of a transaction on the consensus block chain
    or in the mempool visible to a wallet.
```

Motivation
==========

Zcash wallets have to serve two purposes as a user agent:

* to manage the economic actions dictated by the user;
* to manage the privacy implications of these actions.

The goal of this ZIP is to document security and privacy best practices when handling
funds and transactions as the user's agent. These best practices are intended to
provide as much privacy as is feasible by default, while still enabling the user's
desired transactions to occur, and exposing any privacy implications to the user so
that they have enough information to assess the consequences of their economic actions.

This ZIP covers best practices for:

* what information to display to the user about transactions and balances;

> * how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 key tree and Unified Addresses;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_ key tree and Unified Addresses;
```

* when to use external or internal keys/addresses;
* sharing addresses and viewing keys;
* sending and receiving funds (including fee selection);
* migrating funds between pools.

Requirements
============

User consent
------------

A wallet typically reveals some information in the process of creating a transaction.
Which information is revealed depends on the configured wallet privacy policy.
The guiding principle of these requirements is that users must explicitly consent
to each instance of information being revealed by the wallet in a transaction.

A user may give blanket consent to reveal a particular kind of information, and
must also be able to change the configured wallet privacy policy to avoid the
wallet creating new information leaks of a given type.

The specifications below describe some situations in which blanket consent may be
inappropriate.

Some varieties of consent may not be revocable, for example if a user chooses to
share some of their keys.

Prompt accessibility of funds
-----------------------------

Wallets need to take account of two concerns:

* enabling funds to be spent as quickly as possible to reduce latency;

> * waiting for long enough before spending TXOs to ensure that the
>   confirmed-spendable balance is not overestimated, and so can be trusted
>   by the user.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* waiting long enough before spending TXOs to ensure that the
  confirmed-spendable balance is not overestimated, and so can be trusted
  by the user.

```

To enable this we define two kinds of TXOs:

> * An untrusted TXO is a TXO received from a party that may try to double-spend.
> * A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts a
>   double-spend not to occur, e.g. TXOs created by the wallet's internal TXO
>   handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts a
  double-spend not to occur, e.g. TXOs created by the wallet's internal TXO
  handling.
* An untrusted TXO is a TXO received by the wallet that is not trusted.

```

Wallets can then require that untrusted TXOs need more confirmations before
they become spendable than trusted TXOs. This provides an improved trade-off
between latency on the one hand, and reliability and safety on the other.

Specification
=============

Long-term storage of funds
--------------------------

> It is RECOMMENDED that wallets only hold funds as shielded in the long-term;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED that wallets only hold funds as shielded in the long term;
```

> that is, if a wallet supports receiving transparent funds (or supports
> importing a seed from another wallet that may have done so), then it SHOULD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is, if a wallet supports receiving transparent funds (or supports
importing a seed from another wallet that might have done so), then it SHOULD
```

> either auto-shield or opportunistically shield such funds by default.

Reviewer 2: I started this comment yesterday, then canceled it because of the “User consent” section, however, I feel like that might not be sufficient in this case.

I _think_ both auto-shielding and opportunistically shielding tx require `AllowRevealedAmounts`, but in the case of opportunistic shielding, the recipient(s) may have information about the sender (either OOB or via the memo), so revealing the amount that’s being shielded has different (worse) privacy implications than in auto-shielding. So I think it’s important for wallets to make the distinction between user consent for auto-shielding and user consent for opportunistic shielding, rather than being like “user has consented to AllowRevealedAmounts for all shielding.”

Reviewer 3: The recipient in an opportunistic shielding transaction sees more than the amount being shielded. They see a transparent address that they now understand is owned by the same party that is paying them. This can reveal far more than the amount being shielded, including the entire transaction history connected to that transparent address.
For this reason alone, I don't think opportunistic shielding should _ever_ be done. Auto-shielding only.

Author: I agree; a wallet should never opportunistically shield in a way that links different transparent addresses together.

If it is opportunistically shielding all funds the wallet holds in a single t-addr, OTOH, then there's no privacy leak. Since it is already obvious that the t-addr belongs to the sending wallet, in that case there is no additional information revealed to any party *by the opportunistic shielding*, regardless of what they already know.

Following this recommendation improves both collective privacy and the user's
individual privacy, by maximizing the size of the note anonymity set over time.

The remainder of this specification assumes a wallet that follows the above
recommendation, except where explicitly noted.

> A wallet MAY allow users to disable auto-shielding.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn’t a user have to _enable_ auto-(shielding|migrating)?

Since this involves a dedicated tx, it will always incur a fee, which seems like something a user needs to approve.

In the worst case (which would be mitigated by ZIP 317), an attacker could drain wallets that have naïve auto-shielding enabled – the attacker sends a single tx with 1 zat transparent outputs (likely many outputs at different addresses, to make it economically viable for them). Recipients’ wallets auto-shield the 1 zat at a cost of 1,000 (to 5,000) zat.

So, we should add that wallets MUST only create economically-viable auto-(shielding|migrating) txs. Currently this can mean “shield a lot of TXOs at once”, but with 317 it would change to something like “always do at least 2 TXOs, and each one must be at least _n_ * (total_fee / |inputs|)” (where maybe _n_ = 1.5 or something configurable).

Opportunistic (shielding|migration) should also be specified to only happen when it won’t increase the fee. Currently, that is always the case, but again, 317 (or some future change) could alter that).

Reviewer 4: Auto-shielding should never apply to inputs where the cost of shielding them will exceed their economic value.

Reviewer 4: (For reference see https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/694/commits/847ba49761fdfec1213a6d6417db6165c549241e)

Reviewer 4: One possibility would be that, in the case that the Zcash Sustainability Fund proposal is adopted/implemented, is that one could have a "dump dust to the sustainability fund" exemption to the fee rule for block inclusion. That being said, I also think that dust never being spent is fine, because that's equivalent to burning, which reduces the monetary supply. If ZEC some day becomes much more valuable, then what is currently "dust" could then have economic value, and by that time hopefully one of the scalability proposals will have it such that the fees are low enough for it to be worth actually spending the dust on goods and services.

Reviewer 4: One other thing here is that since spends must have their proofs checked, increasing the number of spends to spend this dust does impose a cost on the ecosystem, so the spending entity needs to pay a fee to compensate the ecosystem for validating their spend, so from the perspective of the user wanting to "donate" their dust it's a bit upside-down; they might as well just let the dust sit there and have the effects of the resultant deflation of the monetary base go to benefit the whole ecosystem rather than "recycle" the numerical value of the funds.

Author: You can't have exceptions to requiring the ZIP 317 fee for dust inputs, because dust inputs are as usable for the kind of DoS attacks that motivated ZIP 317 as any other input: they require verifying a spend auth signature and potentially a zk proof.

Author: In any case, considerations about *how* to auto-shield and/or opportunistically shield should probably go in a separate section to this "Long-term storage of funds" section. This line is correct as written, but should probably be generalized:
```suggestion
A wallet MAY allow users to disable auto-shielding, auto-migration,
opportunistic shielding, and/or opportunistic migration. If it does so,
this need not be via four independent settings.
```

Trusted and untrusted TXOs
--------------------------

A wallet SHOULD treat received TXOs that are outputs of transactions created
by the same wallet, as trusted TXOs. Wallets MAY enable users to mark specific
external transactions as trusted, allowing their received TXOs also to be
classified as trusted TXOs.

A wallet SHOULD have a policy that is clearly communicated to the user for
the number of confirmations needed to spend untrusted and trusted TXOs
respectively. The following confirmation policy is RECOMMENDED:

* 10 confirmations, for untrusted TXOs;
* 3 confirmations, for trusted TXOs.

Rationale for the given numbers of confirmations
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for choosing three confirmations for trusted TXOs is that

> empirically, reorgs are usually less than three blocks.

Reviewer: Any chance of a citation, given this language ("empirically", etc)?

Reviewer 5: I second this request.   We need to know what data this recommendation is based on so we can evaluate it for ourselves.

> The consequences of attempting to spend an untrusted note in the case of a
> rollback may be less severe than attempting to spend a trusted note. The value
> received from a trusted note should always be recoverable, whereas recovering
> value received from an untrusted note may require the user to request that
> funds are re-sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The consequences of attempting to spend a trusted note in the case of a
rollback may be less severe than attempting to spend an untrusted note. The value
received from a trusted note should always be recoverable, whereas recovering
value received from an untrusted note may require the user to request that
funds are re-sent.
```

Categories of TXOs according to spendability
--------------------------------------------

A TXO is *spendable*, relative to a given block chain and wallet state,
if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is unspent;
* the TXO is not committed to be spent in another transaction created
  by this wallet; and

> * the wallet has the TXO's spending key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the wallet has the TXO's spending key (for whatever protocol the TXO uses).
```

> * the wallet has the TXO's spending key.

Reviewer: let's add a note about shielding/auto-shielding

A TXO is *confirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the wallet is synchronized; and
* the TXO is spendable; and

> * either auto-shielding is disabled or the TXO is shielded; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is/will be taken into account in the definition of spendable

* the TXO is trusted and has at least the required confirmations for
  trusted TXOs, or it is untrusted and has at least the required

>   confirmations for untrusted TXOs.

Reviewer: Definition needs to include auto-migration

A TXO is *unconfirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if the TXO is spendable but is not
confirmed-spendable in that state.

A TXO is *watch-only* if and only if the wallet has its full viewing key
(or address in the case of a transparent TXO) but not its spending key.

> A wallet MUST NOT attempt to spend a TXO that is not confirmed-spendable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A wallet MUST NOT attempt to spend a TXO in a user-initiated transaction
that is not confirmed-spendable.

```

* The pending balance is the sum of values of unconfirmed-spendable TXOs.
* The total balance is the confirmed-spendable balance plus the pending
  balance.

Note: the definition of "confirmed-spendable" above ensures that:

* if auto-shielding is enabled, transparent funds will be reported in
  the pending or total balance, but not in the confirmed-spendable
  balance;
* if the wallet is not synchronized, the confirmed-spendable balance
  will be zero.

If auto-shielding is disabled, the wallet MAY report shielded and
transparent balances separately. If it does so, it MUST make clear
whether each reported balance corresponds to a confirmed-spendable,
pending, or total subset of funds.

Rationale for reporting of balances
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If auto-shielding is disabled, then separate shielded and transparent
balances (and potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances
per pool) can constitute useful information. If auto-shielding is enabled
then the wallet can and will automatically spend transparent TXOs in
order to shield them, and so transparent TXOs need to be presented as
pending, not as part of the balance spendable by the user.

> 

Reviewer: Also take into account auto-migration

Author: Taken into account by "Potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances per pool could also be useful." I don't think we need to qualify that by whether auto-migration is enabled. I'm skeptical that it is ever useful other than for debugging, tbh.

TODO: The specification of balance reporting is intended to give the user
visibility into the operation of auto-shielding, opportunistic shielding,
and pool migration/usage. (Does the spec satisfy this?)

Reporting of transactions
-------------------------

If a transaction contains both spendable and watch-only TXOs, its spendable
and watch-only incoming balances MUST be reported separately.

Incoming transactions
'''''''''''''''''''''

A transaction is incoming if it contains unconfirmed-spendable TXOs.
Incoming transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations
and their balances as described in `Reporting of balances`_.

Sent transactions
'''''''''''''''''

A transaction is sent if it was either:
* created by the wallet, or

> * detected using the wallet's outgoing viewing keys, or

Reviewer: "outgoing viewing keys" are sapling/orchard only terms

> * detected using the wallet's outgoing viewing keys, or
> * detected as having been sent from one of the wallet's watch-only addresses.

Author: ```suggestion
* detected by using the wallet's outgoing viewing keys to decrypt
  Sapling or Orchard outputs, or
* detected as spending a note that was at some time held by the
  wallet by recognizing that note's nullifier, or
* detected as spending a transparent TXO associated with one of
  the wallet's addresses (including watch-only addresses).
```

> Sent transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations,

Reviewer: Only relevant to tx's not mined

> how long until they expire, and their balances as described in

Reviewer: Only relevant to tx's not mined (expiration)

> how long until they expire, and their balances as described in
> `Reporting of balances`_.

Author: ```suggestion
how long until they expire (if they are unmined and have an expiry
height), and their balances as described in `Reporting of balances`_.
```

Transaction creation
--------------------

Obtaining user consent for information leakage
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Information leakage analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The privacy provided by a Zcash transaction depends on the information leaked
in the creation of that transaction and the process of it being broadcast for
inclusion in the block chain.

The requirements in this section are intended to minimize the leakage of such
information where possible, and to ensure that the user is informed of any
remaining information that would be leaked, and consents to such leakage.

The list below describes the kinds of information that might be leaked. After
a candidate transaction has been created and prior to it being revealed
outside a trusted path to the user, the wallet user interface SHOULD obtain
the user's consent for all of the leaked information.

Assumption: There is always a transaction confirmation step for transactions
that send funds out of the wallet.

> 

Reviewer 4: We will need to add some language here about the information leaked to the lightwallet server. Or, perhaps a separate section?

Reviewer 6: The ZIP doesn't specifically refer to wallet types. perhaps it should?

from https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3631672.3631676 there 4 broad types of wallets based on who is in custody of keys (sovereign or delegated) and how the blockchain is accessed (as a peer or through a trusted third party). 

<img width="902" alt="image" src="https://github.com/zcash/zips/assets/484008/2710aaca-409a-4ed0-8c2f-d25d8909ef97">

We might want to provide or reference definitions of types of wallets and scope the ones that we are referring to.

SHOULD be zero.

* Expiry height and anchor position

See `Anchor selection`_ below.

These give information about what block height the creator was synced to, and
some policy information.

* Transparent inputs and outputs

See `Linkability of transactions or addresses`_.

* Public value balances

  * Together with the transparent inputs and outputs, these determine the fee
    and the amount being transferred between pools.
  * The fee is dependent on policy, but for a given policy we attempt to make
    it only depend on other already-leaked metadata.

SHOULD try to create fully shielded transactions where possible.

Open question: Are we going to describe the policy that zcashd uses?

* Numbers of JoinSplits, Spends, Outputs, and Actions

  * This could correlate with other information under certain circumstances.
    For example in a “dusting attack”, the adversary sends a victim lots of
    small-valued notes (or notes with strategically chosen values),
    increasing the probability that the victim’s transactions will have a
    larger number of spends than other transactions (or an identifiable
    number of spends). There are note management strategies that can mitigate

>     this, but they have not been implemented yet.

Reviewer: see ZIP 317, which should make dusting attacks more expensive

Reviewer 4: ZIP 317 will likely also alter wallet behavior with respect to how and when low-valued notes are included as inputs, and we may want to take that into account. Notes with less value than the marginal per-action fee will likely remain unspent unless it is possible to use them as padding. Pool-crossing transactions will not be able to take advantage of the padding allowance, because we expect all available action slots to be consumed by the economically relevant parts of the transaction. 

Wallets might also have policies that prevent TXOs from being spent if a substantial part of their value is lost to fees; we should make recommendations about that as well.

Author: I don't think that ZIP 317 affects what is said here other than in the specific note values that an adversary would choose.

> * Which spends of given notes are repeated across transactions
> 
>   * This may happen because a previous transaction expired and the user is
>     trying to spend some of the same notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Which spends of given TXOs are repeated across transactions

  * This may happen because a previous transaction expired and the user is
    trying to spend some of the same TXOs.
```

* Whether the transaction is coinbase

* For coinbase transactions, the amounts / destination addresses / memos of
  shielded outputs

* Orchard flags (enableSpends/enableOutputs)

  * Under normal circumstances these only depend on whether the transaction
    is coinbase.

Linkability of transactions or addresses
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Motivation
~~~~~~~~~~

We want to support creating unlinkable addresses, in order that a user can
give different addresses to different counterparties, in such a way that the
counterparties (even if they collude) cannot tell that the addresses were
provided by the same or distinct users.

If multiple UTXOs are received at the same transparent address, it is safe
to shield them all in the same transaction, because that is not leaking
additional information.

UTXOs received on different transparent receivers SHOULD NOT be shielded
in the same transaction. Ideally, when they are shielded in separate
transactions, this should be done in such a way that the timing of those

> transactions is not linkable.

Reviewer: More detail how to do that?

Author: This is in the wrong place. I think that if we only document leakage rather than explicitly say *in the specification of how to construct transactions* how to mitigate it, then implementors will ignore it.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
UTXOs received on different transparent receivers SHOULD NOT be shielded
in the same transaction. Ideally, when they are shielded in separate
transactions, this should be done in such a way that the timing of those
transactions is not linkable.

TODO: move this. Daira-Emma thinks that if we only document leakage rather
than explicitly say in the specification of how to construct transactions
how to mitigate it, then implementors will ignore it.
```

> When spending transparent UTXOs, they should only be sent to an internal
> shielded receiver belonging to the wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When spending transparent UTXOs, they SHOULD only be sent to an internal
shielded receiver belonging to the wallet.
```

A wallet MUST NOT send funds to a transparent address unless all of the
source funds come from shielded pools, and this SHOULD be a single shielded
pool.

> 

Reviewer: Distinguish with auto-shielding, auto-migrating, etc ?

We want to minimize pool crossing.

Anchor selection
''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD choose an anchor a number of blocks back from the head of the
chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block
is at height H, the anchor SHOULD reflect the final treestate of the block at

> height H-3.

Reviewer: This is targeting the RECOMMENDED levels but this document allows other depths

Author: Yes we should define a parameter for this, and then RECOMMEND a value of 3.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A wallet SHOULD choose an anchor a number of blocks back from the head of the
chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block
is at height H, the anchor SHOULD reflect the final treestate of the block at
height H-3.

TODO: Define a parameter for this depth, and then RECOMMEND a value of 3.
```

Rationale for anchor selection
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> * If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
>   the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
>   both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent notes will have
>   been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions that
>   spend those notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
  the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent TXOs will have
  been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions that
  spend those TXOs.
```

Author: This only applies to notes; transparent TXOs don't have nullifiers.

>   both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent notes will have
>   been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions that
>   spend those notes.

Author: ```suggestion
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent shielded notes
  will have been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions
  that spend those notes.
```

> * On the other hand, it is undesirable to choose an anchor too many blocks
>   back, because that prevents more recently received notes from being spent.
> * Using a fixed anchor depth (as opposed to a different depth depending on
>   whether or not we are spending trusted notes) avoids leaking information
>   about whether or not we spent trusted notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On the other hand, it is undesirable to choose an anchor too many blocks
  back, because that prevents more recently received TXOs from being spent.
* Using a fixed anchor depth (as opposed to a different depth depending on
  whether or not we are spending trusted TXOs) avoids leaking information
  about whether or not we spent trusted TXOs.
```

Expiration height
'''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD create transactions using the default expiration height of
40 blocks from the current height, as specified in [#zip-0203]_.

Open question
'''''''''''''

How should wallet developers time transactions to avoid linkability?

* when we roll addresses with transparent components, we have to consider
  how that could allow linking of shielded components

TODO: dusting attack mitigation

Network-layer privacy
---------------------

Viewing keys
------------

What they are supposed to reveal; see ZIP 310 for Sapling (needs updating for
Orchard). https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/606

Allowed transfers
-----------------

* Sprout -> transparent or Sapling
* Sapling -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* Orchard -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* if auto-shielding is off:
  *  transparent -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* if auto-shielding is on:
  *  transparent -> internal Orchard or Sapling

Note: wallets MAY further restrict the set of transfers they perform.

Auto-shielding
--------------

Wallets SHOULD NOT spend funds from a transparent address to an external address,

> unless the user gives explicit consent for this on a per-transaction basis.

Reviewer: From a transparent internal address? Or any transparent address?

Author: Any. I'll think about how this should be worded to make the rationale clearer.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Wallets SHOULD NOT spend funds from a transparent address to an external address,
unless the user gives explicit consent for this on a per-transaction basis.

TODO: Reword this to define the source transparent address as any transparent
address (external, internal, or ephemeral), except in the case of ephemeral as
allowed for implementing ZIP 320.
```

> In order to support this policy, wallets SHOULD implement a system of auto-shielding
> with the following characteristics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to support this policy, wallets SHOULD implement a system of auto-shielding
with the following characteristics:
```

If auto-shielding functionality is available in a wallet, then users MUST be able
to explicitly consent to one of the following possibilities:

* auto-shielding is always on;
* auto-shielding is always off;
* the user specifies a policy...

Auto-shielding MUST be one of:

* "must opt in or out" (zcashd will do this -- i.e. refuse to start unless the option
  is configured), or
* always on.

Auto-migration
--------------

Information leakage for transfers between pools
-----------------------------------------------

If no auto-migration, if you can satisfy a transfer request to Sapling from your
Sapling funds, do so.

The user's consent is needed to reveal amounts. Therefore, there should be

> per-transaction opt-in for any amount-revealing transfer.

Reviewer: Reveal amounts to whom?

Author: ```suggestion
The user's consent is needed to reveal amounts publically (as opposed
to revealing them to the holder of a viewing key authorized to see that
amount). Therefore, there should be per-transaction opt-in for any
transfer that publically reveals amounts on chain.
```

* there may be a compatibility issue for amount-revealing cross-pool txns that were
  previously allowed without opt-in

> Don't automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer (since that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MUST NOT automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer (since that
```

> Don't automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer (since that
> could reveal the total funds in some pool).

Author: ```suggestion
Wallets MUST NOT automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer
(since that could reveal the total funds the user holds in some pool).
```

::

  ZIP: 315
  Title: Best Practices for Wallet Implementations
  Owners: Daira Emma Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
          Kris Nuttycombe <kris@electriccoin.co>
  Credits: Francisco Gindre

>   Status: Proposed

Author: Change this back to Draft if we're not finishing it in this PR.

  Category: Wallet
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/447>

>   Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/>

Author: ```suggestion
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/607>
```

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be

> interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Author: ```suggestion
interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear in
all capitals.
```

> The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be
> interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Author: ```suggestion
The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to
be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [#BCP14]_ when, and only when, they appear
in all capitals.
```

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Auto-shielding
    The process of automatically transferring transparent funds to the most recent
    shielded pool on receipt.

> Opportunistic shielding
>     The process of transferring previously received transparent funds to the most
>     recent shielded pool as part of a user-initiated transaction.
> 

Author: Removed because we will recommend against opportunistic shielding, and it can be defined at the point that we do that.

```suggestion
```

Auto-migration
    The process of automatically transferring shielded funds from older pools to the
    most preferred (usually the most recent) pool on receipt.

Opportunistic migration
    The process of transferring previously received shielded funds from older pools
    to the most preferred (usually the most recent) pool as part of a user-initiated

>     transaction.

Author: Opportunistic migration has a similar problem to opportunistic shielding: it links the payment to the amount being transferred between pools, from the point of view of a recipient or IVK holder.

If, say, all of your funds are currently in Sapling, and the next transaction after you enable opportunistic migration (or after your wallet makes it the default) happens to be to an untrusted party, then a naive implementation of opportunistic shielding will reveal your total wealth in ZEC to that party.

I'm open to opinions on whether we should just recommend against opportunistic migration in the same way as opportunistic shielding, or just document the problem and perhaps recommend a limit on the amount migrated in each tx. I think we will need to do so in such a way that we don't completely rule out opportunistic balancing of funds between pools.

Reviewer 6: I agree with @daira has stated. I think that the "opportunity" has to be consented by the user on a _per transaction_ basis. 

Not only there's a big chance of correlating balances to people when doing a transaction with a third party, but also I can recalls problems with a past **coin voting** and ZecWallet opportunistic shielding. There might be times were someone sets a funds for a purpose somewhere and forgets about it in another context. It's not that the person does not care about those funds being there anymore, it's just how the human brain works.  

If the wallet doesn't state explicitly what's the "opportunity" then the user might not recall having delegated that decision to the wallet and unintended things can happen.

Transaction output (TXO)
    An output (transparent coin or shielded note) of a transaction on the consensus

>     block chain or in the mempool visible to a wallet.

Author: Add informal definitions of:
* known-spendable and confirmed-spendable TXOs;
* trusted and untrusted TXOs.

These should forward-reference the specification section with the formal definitions.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

TODO: Add informal definitions of:
* known-spendable and confirmed-spendable TXOs;
* trusted and untrusted TXOs.

These should forward-reference the specification section with the formal definitions.

```

* how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 [#zip-0032]_ key tree and Unified Addresses [#zip-0316]_;
* when to use external or internal keys/addresses;
* sharing addresses and viewing keys;
* sending and receiving funds (including fee selection);
* migrating funds between pools.

Requirements
============

User consent
------------

A wallet typically reveals some information in the process of creating a transaction.
Which information is revealed depends on the configured wallet privacy policy.
The guiding principle of these requirements is that users must explicitly consent
to each instance of information being revealed by the wallet in a transaction.

A user may give blanket consent to reveal a particular kind of information, and
must also be able to change the configured wallet privacy policy to avoid the
wallet creating new information leaks of a given type.

The specifications below describe some situations in which blanket consent may be
inappropriate.

Some varieties of consent may not be revocable, for example if a user chooses to
share some of their keys.

Prompt accessibility of funds
-----------------------------

> Wallets need to take account of two concerns:

Author: ```suggestion
Wallets need to take account of two main concerns with respect to
accessibility of funds:
```

* enabling funds to be spent as quickly as possible to reduce latency;
* waiting long enough before spending TXOs to ensure that the
  confirmed-spendable balance is not overestimated, and so can be trusted

>   by the user.

Author: Also, "confirmed-spendable" is used before definition.

> To enable this we define two kinds of TXOs:

Author: ```suggestion
To support this we define two kinds of TXOs:
```

* A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts a
  double-spend not to occur, e.g. TXOs created by the wallet's internal TXO
  handling.
* An untrusted TXO is a TXO received by the wallet that is not trusted.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> * A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts a
>   double-spend not to occur, e.g. TXOs created by the wallet's internal TXO
>   handling.
> * An untrusted TXO is a TXO received by the wallet that is not trusted.
> 

Author: This puts an undue emphasis on double-spends. It's possible for a shielded output to become unmined (and not remined) without a double-spend, because its anchor has been invalidated.

```suggestion
* A trusted TXO is a TXO received from a party where the wallet trusts that
  it will remain mined in its original transaction, such as TXOs created by
  the wallet's internal TXO handling.
* An untrusted TXO is a TXO received by the wallet that is not trusted.
```

Wallets can then require that untrusted TXOs need more confirmations before

> they become spendable than trusted TXOs. This provides an improved trade-off
> between latency on the one hand, and reliability and safety on the other.

Author: ```suggestion
they become confirmed-spendable than trusted TXOs. This provides an improved
trade-off between latency on the one hand, and reliability and safety on the other.
```

Specification
=============

Long-term storage of funds
--------------------------

It is RECOMMENDED that wallets only hold funds as shielded in the long term;
that is, if a wallet supports receiving transparent funds (or supports
importing a seed from another wallet that might have done so), then it SHOULD
either auto-shield or opportunistically shield such funds by default.

> Following this recommendation improves both collective privacy and the user's
> individual privacy, by maximizing the size of the note anonymity set over time.
> 
> The remainder of this specification assumes a wallet that follows the above
> recommendation, except where explicitly noted.

Author: ```suggestion

If a shielding transaction spends from multiple transparent addresses, those
addresses will be linked. Despite the fact that it is not possible to achieve strong
privacy guarantees from any use of transparent addresses, it is undesirable to
reveal this additional information. Both auto-shielding and opportunistic shielding
SHOULD therefore only shield from funds held in a single transparent address,
unless the user has given explicit consent to do otherwise.

Following these recommendations improves both collective privacy and the user's
individual privacy, by maximizing the size of the note anonymity set over time and
minimizing the potential linkage of shielding transactions to other transactions.

The remainder of this specification assumes a wallet that follows the above
recommendations, except where explicitly noted.
```

A wallet MAY allow users to disable auto-shielding.

Trusted and untrusted TXOs
--------------------------

A wallet SHOULD treat received TXOs that are outputs of transactions created
by the same wallet, as trusted TXOs. Wallets MAY enable users to mark specific
external transactions as trusted, allowing their received TXOs also to be
classified as trusted TXOs.

A wallet SHOULD have a policy that is clearly communicated to the user for
the number of confirmations needed to spend untrusted and trusted TXOs
respectively. The following confirmation policy is RECOMMENDED:

* 10 confirmations, for untrusted TXOs;
* 3 confirmations, for trusted TXOs.

Rationale for the given numbers of confirmations
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for choosing three confirmations for trusted TXOs is that

> empirically, reorgs are usually less than three blocks.

Author: > I believe, from reading further down, that if the transaction doesn't or can't be replayed on the new branch that a new transaction will have to be broadcast, revealing the nullifier a second time. And this is not desirable because someone who observed the particular nullifier both times and knew its paying party one of those times now knows the paying party for the other time too.

That will be dealt with (see https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/607#issuecomment-1836539293) but not here.

The consequences of attempting to spend a trusted TXO may be less severe in the

> case of a rollback than the consequences of attempting to spend an untrusted TXO.

Author: This is vague. We can improve it later.

The value received from a trusted TXO should always be recoverable, whereas
recovering value received from an untrusted TXO may require the user to request
that funds are re-sent.

Categories of TXOs according to spendability
--------------------------------------------

A TXO is *spendable*, relative to a given block chain and wallet state,
if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is unspent;
* the TXO is not committed to be spent in another transaction created
  by this wallet; and
* the wallet has the TXO's spending key (for whatever protocol the TXO uses).

A TXO is *confirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

> * the wallet is synchronized; and
> * the TXO is spendable; and

Author: This is too strong. It's sufficient that we know that the TXO is spendable, which requires that we know it is unspent at the current chain tip. A condition on knowing that it is unspent at the current chain tip is that we've synchronized the nullifier set to that tip, but that belongs in the definition of "known-spendable".

```suggestion
* the TXO is known-spendable; and
```

> * either auto-shielding is disabled or the TXO is shielded; and

Author: ```suggestion
* either auto-shielding is not active or the TXO is shielded; and
* auto-migration *from* whatever protocol the TXO uses is not active; and
```

> A TXO is *confirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
> wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:
> 
> * the wallet is synchronized; and
> * the TXO is spendable; and
> * either auto-shielding is disabled or the TXO is shielded; and
> * the TXO is trusted and has at least the required confirmations for
>   trusted TXOs, or it is untrusted and has at least the required
>   confirmations for untrusted TXOs.

Author: There are several issues with this definition:
* Requiring the wallet to be synchronized is too strong. It's sufficient to replace that with a requirement that we know the TXO is unspent at the current chain tip. This in turn requires that we've synchronized the nullifier set to that tip, but that belongs in the definition of "known-spendable".
* It assumes that transparent TXOs should be treated as confirmed-spendable if auto-shielding is disabled (and other conditions are met). That's not correct because the alternative to auto-shielding, now that we've decided that opportunistic shielding should be excluded for privacy reasons, is manually triggered shielding. In that case the funds are still not confirmed user-spendable until the user has shielded them.

```suggestion
A TXO is *confirmed user-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is known-spendable; and
* the TXO is shielded, or the wallet allows spending transparent
  TXOs in user-initiated transactions contrary to recommendation; and
* the TXO is trusted and has at least the required confirmations for
  trusted TXOs, or it is untrusted and has at least the required
  confirmations for untrusted TXOs.
```

Reviewer 7: I disagree with this state being called "confirmed user-spendable", and with the change to the second bullet point. Note that the existing definition of confirmed-spendable was chosen to ensure that the "confirmed-spendable balance" includes only outputs that a user-initiated transaction can spend, and manual shielding is a user-initiated transaction. The fact that a wallet doesn't allow spending transparent TXOs directly to _an external address_ is a separate consideration.

The point of having the synchronized aspect be part of "confirmed-spendable" rather than (what is now called) "known-spendable" was to ensure that wallets don't report zero balance in the short time between starting up and catching up to a recent chain tip (instead they should show that balance as part of "pending"). Under the current definition, "unconfirmed-spendable" (the sum of which is the pending balance) omits any TXO for which the wallet's view is out-of-date, which will be all of them.

A TXO is *unconfirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and

> wallet state, if and only if the TXO is spendable but is not

Author: ```suggestion
wallet state, if and only if the TXO is known-spendable but is not
```

> A TXO is *unconfirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
> wallet state, if and only if the TXO is spendable but is not
> confirmed-spendable in that state.

Author: ```suggestion
A TXO is *unconfirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if the TXO is known-spendable but is not
confirmed user-spendable in that state.
```

Reviewer 7: I amended @daira's suggestion to revert `confirmed user-spendable` back to `confirmed-spendable`, as the latter is still the defined term after hir suggestions.

A TXO is *watch-only* if and only if the wallet has its full viewing key
(or address in the case of a transparent TXO) but not its spending key.

A wallet MUST NOT attempt to spend a TXO that is not confirmed-spendable.

Note: the definition of a TXO includes outputs in mempool transactions
that are unconflicted from the perspective of the wallet.

> Reporting of balances

Reviewer 6: I suggest writing this differently to improve readability.. 

First, define different kind of balances the ZIP considers.

Then explain how wallets should report them. This lets wallet developers or analysts to quickly locate the concepts when needed.

Author: The intended meanings of the balances can't be defined precisely without the concept of trusted and untrusted TXOs. This is a Specification section: it should be using precise definitions.

In order to define balances before trusted/untrusted TXOs within the Specification section, we would first have to define balances loosely, then have a diversion to defining trusted and untrusted TXOs, then go back to defining balances strictly. That's just more confusing, and it carries the risk that implementors will try to apply their own interpretation of what the loose definitions mean, which is undesirable because part of the point of ZIP 315 is to promote consistency between wallets.

A loose definition of balances should, however, be given in the Requirements section. Currently "confirmed-spendable" is used before definition [on line 98](https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/607/files#diff-81a3ab3f008443ec864f316692e2e6a15808c87d22f0032a930ce76019a02a05R98) in "Requirements &mdash; Prompt accessibility of funds", and that's a clarity bug.

---------------------

Wallets SHOULD report:

* Confirmed-spendable balance.
* Pending balance, *or* total balance.

These are calculated as follows:

* The confirmed-spendable balance is the sum of values of
  confirmed-spendable TXOs.
* The pending balance is the sum of values of unconfirmed-spendable TXOs.
* The total balance is the confirmed-spendable balance plus the pending
  balance.

Note: the definition of "confirmed-spendable" above ensures that:

* if auto-shielding is enabled, transparent funds will be reported in
  the pending or total balance, but not in the confirmed-spendable
  balance;

> * if the wallet is not synchronized, the confirmed-spendable balance
>   will be zero.

Author: ```suggestion
* if the wallet has not synchronized at least the nullfier set to the chain tip,
  the confirmed-spendable balance will be zero.
```

Reviewer 6: I agree. May be add that as a TODO item?

If auto-shielding is disabled, the wallet MAY report shielded and
transparent balances separately. If it does so, it MUST make clear
whether each reported balance corresponds to a confirmed-spendable,
pending, or total subset of funds.

Rationale for reporting of balances
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> If auto-shielding is disabled, then separate shielded and transparent
> balances (and potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances
> per pool) can constitute useful information. If auto-shielding is enabled
> then the wallet can and will automatically spend transparent TXOs in
> order to shield them, and so transparent TXOs need to be presented as
> pending, not as part of the balance spendable by the user.

Author: ```suggestion
If auto-shielding is disabled, then separate shielded and transparent
balances can constitute useful information. If auto-shielding is enabled
then the wallet can and will automatically spend transparent TXOs in
order to shield them, and so transparent TXOs need to be presented as
pending, not as part of the balance spendable by the user.

Potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances per pool
could also be useful.
```

> TODO: The specification of balance reporting is intended to give the user
> visibility into the operation of auto-shielding, opportunistic shielding,
> and pool migration/usage. (Does the spec satisfy this?)

Author: ```suggestion
Open question: Does the specification of balance reporting give the user
sufficient visibility into the operation of auto-shielding, opportunistic
shielding, and pool migration/usage?
```

Reporting of transactions
-------------------------

If a transaction contains both spendable and watch-only TXOs, its spendable
and watch-only incoming balances MUST be reported separately.

Incoming transactions
'''''''''''''''''''''

A transaction is incoming if it contains unconfirmed-spendable TXOs.
Incoming transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations
and their balances as described in `Reporting of balances`_.

Sent transactions
'''''''''''''''''

A transaction is sent if it was either:
* created by the wallet, or
* detected by using the wallet's outgoing viewing keys to decrypt
  Sapling or Orchard outputs, or
* detected as spending a note that was at some time held by the
  wallet by recognizing that note's nullifier, or
* detected as spending a transparent TXO associated with one of
  the wallet's addresses (including watch-only addresses).

Sent transactions SHOULD be reported with their number of confirmations,

> how long until they expire (if they are unmined and have an expiry
> height), and their balances as described in `Reporting of balances`_.

Author: ```suggestion
an estimate of how long until they expire (if they are unmined and
have an expiry height), and their balances as described in
`Reporting of balances`_.
```

Transaction creation
--------------------

Obtaining user consent for information leakage
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Information leakage analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The privacy provided by a Zcash transaction depends on the information leaked
in the creation of that transaction and the process of it being broadcast for
inclusion in the block chain.

The requirements in this section are intended to minimize the leakage of such
information where possible, and to ensure that the user is informed of any
remaining information that would be leaked, and consents to such leakage.

The list below describes the kinds of information that might be leaked. After
a candidate transaction has been created and prior to it being revealed
outside a trusted path to the user, the wallet user interface SHOULD obtain

> the user's consent for all of the leaked information.

Author: I disagree that the height a wallet was sync'd to is not a valid concern to anyone. It should be documented here as leaked information. If a wallet developer decides that it's okay to have that leak without telling the user about it, that's their choice (but I will strongly disagree with them and not use that wallet, assuming I know about it).

This particular leakage can only happen when the wallet is syncing. My personal view as a knowledgeable user is that I would *always* want to turn off any facility to send transactions using old anchors while syncing. I consider it a misfeature both for privacy and reliability reasons. In particular, the security properties of PoW are such that a wallet can never be sure that an old anchor is valid (with *any* fixed number of confirmations). You only have eventual consistency for the tip, i.e. once the full node (either yours, or one you trust via lightwalletd) can no longer find any later block by asking its peers.

In any case, for my usage patterns, I care much more about privacy and reliability than I do about spend latency while catching up.

Assumption: There is always a transaction confirmation step for transactions
that send funds out of the wallet.

Kinds of information leakage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Transaction version (v4 or v5, as of NU5)

> SHOULD use v5 (unless you're spending Sprout funds).

Author: This part is just rough notes. Don't spend time on it, it needs to be completely rewritten.

> SHOULD use v5 (unless you're spending Sprout funds).

Author: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED to use v5 transactions unless Sprout funds are being spent.
```

* Lock time (rarely used; may be a distinguisher if it is)

SHOULD be zero.

* Expiry height and anchor position

See `Anchor selection`_ below.

These give information about what block height the creator was synced to, and
some policy information.

* Transparent inputs and outputs

See `Linkability of transactions or addresses`_.

* Public value balances

  * Together with the transparent inputs and outputs, these determine the fee
    and the amount being transferred between pools.
  * The fee is dependent on policy, but for a given policy we attempt to make
    it only depend on other already-leaked metadata.

SHOULD try to create fully shielded transactions where possible.

> Open question: Are we going to describe the policy that zcashd uses?
> 
> 

Author: No, given that:
* zcashd is being deprecated;
* the design of the privacy policy stuff was unduly constrained by zcashd's RPC API, and does not present a good UX that we should encourage for general use.

```suggestion
```

    is coinbase.

Linkability of transactions or addresses
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Motivation for choices reducing linkability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We want to support creating unlinkable addresses, in order that a user can
give different addresses to different counterparties, in such a way that the
counterparties (even if they collude) cannot tell that the addresses were
provided by the same or distinct users.

If multiple UTXOs are received at the same transparent address, it is safe
to shield them all in the same transaction, because that is not leaking
additional information.

UTXOs received on different transparent receivers SHOULD NOT be shielded
in the same transaction. Ideally, when they are shielded in separate
transactions, this should be done in such a way that the timing of those
transactions is not linkable.

When spending transparent UTXOs, they SHOULD only be sent to an internal
shielded receiver belonging to the wallet.

A wallet MUST NOT send funds to a transparent address unless all of the
source funds come from shielded pools, and this SHOULD be a single shielded

> pool.

Author: Yes I think this was an overspecification.

We want to minimize pool crossing.

Anchor selection
''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD choose an anchor a number of blocks back from the head of the

> chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block

Author: Because this spec is only half-written and there are some inconsistencies. I'll mark the PR as a draft to make that clearer.

> chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block

Reviewer 7: That is one of the core observations in this ZIP: the trust / confirmation depth can be decoupled from the anchor height. We can and should set the anchor height to the trusted confirmation depth precisely because that leaks less information; privately a wallet can then select untrusted notes with more confirmations, but it doesn't reveal this distinction publicly.

is at height H, the anchor SHOULD reflect the final treestate of the block at
height H-3.

Rationale for anchor selection
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

* If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
  the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent shielded notes
  will have been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions

>   that spend those notes.

Author: Reword this given the proposed mitigation below.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
  the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent shielded notes
  will have been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions
  that spend those notes.

  TODO: Reword this given the proposed mitigation below.
```

* On the other hand, it is undesirable to choose an anchor too many blocks
  back, because that prevents more recently received shielded notes from
  being spent.
* Using a fixed anchor depth (as opposed to a different depth depending on
  whether or not we are spending trusted shielded notes) avoids leaking
  information about whether or not the shielded notes we spent were
  trusted.

Note selection
''''''''''''''

TODO: consider what we should do when nullifiers are revealed in a transaction
that is then invalidated. Should those notes be prioritized to be spent soon,

> or should they be used in a note management tx?

Author: Yes they SHOULD be used in a note management tx. This avoids linking the invalidated tx with some arbitrary future tx.

Provided that there are no transparent outputs leaving this wallet's control, the same arities and transparent outputs SHOULD be preserved, which also avoids revealing whether the user changed their mind about whether to send the original semantic transaction.

TODO: dusting attack mitigation

Network-layer privacy
---------------------

Viewing keys
------------

What they are supposed to reveal; see ZIP 310 for Sapling (needs updating for
Orchard). https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/606

Allowed transfers
-----------------

* Sprout -> transparent or Sapling
* Sapling -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* Orchard -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* if auto-shielding is off:
  *  transparent -> transparent or Sapling or Orchard
* if auto-shielding is on:
  *  transparent -> internal Orchard or Sapling

Note: wallets MAY further restrict the set of transfers they perform.

Auto-shielding
--------------

Wallets SHOULD NOT spend funds from a transparent address to an external address,
unless the user gives explicit consent for this on a per-transaction basis.

In order to support this policy, wallets SHOULD implement a system of auto-shielding
with the following characteristics.

If auto-shielding functionality is available in a wallet, then users MUST be able
to explicitly consent to one of the following possibilities:

* auto-shielding is always on;
* auto-shielding is always off;

> * the user specifies a policy...

Reviewer 4: One such user-specified policy could be "allow auto-shielding of funds sent from transparent address X" where the user knows that X is their exchange account or whatever.

I believe that the "must opt in or out" option below is intended to refer to each individual shielding action - basically, when transparent funds are retrieved, under the first option the user would be prompted to shield them, allowing them to decline; under the second option, the shielding operation would be fully automatic without the need for additional user input. Note that the second option does not preclude auto-shielding functionality from randomizing shielding times, or applying thresholds etc.

> * the user specifies a policy...

Reviewer 3: Enabling auto-shielding on a per T address basis is an interesting idea. I suppose if I shared spending ability of a T address with others, but my wallet kept auto-shielding them (effectively stealing ZEC from the group) that would be a problem. 

So maybe a wallet initialized with a seed phrase should automatically use auto-shielding on any T addresses generated from that seed phrase. But if a transparent spending key is imported into the wallet individually, a checkbox can allow the user to indicate whether to auto-shield.

Auto-shielding MUST be one of:

* "must opt in or out" (zcashd will do this -- i.e. refuse to start unless the option
  is configured), or
* always on.

Auto-migration
--------------

Information leakage for transfers between pools
-----------------------------------------------

If no auto-migration, if you can satisfy a transfer request to Sapling from your
Sapling funds, do so.

The user's consent is needed to reveal amounts publically (as opposed
to revealing them to the holder of a viewing key authorized to see that
amount). Therefore, there should be per-transaction opt-in for any
transfer that publically reveals amounts on chain.

* there may be a compatibility issue for amount-revealing cross-pool txns that were
  previously allowed without opt-in

Wallets MUST NOT automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer

> (since that could reveal the total funds the user holds in some pool).

Reviewer 3: It could, but as I point out earlier, a wallet that seek to maintain some proportional balance between the two pools may want to distribute ZEC from two pools just to maintain the desired balance between them, even if either pool had adequate funds for the whole spend. A UA with receivers in both shielded pools make it possible to always pay without turning any turnstile. This is very valuable for privacy.
IMO then, it's perfectly reasonable to combine pools for a single spend. If folks want to read into that to think I've drained one of those pools in my wallet, they're making stuff up.

Reviewer 4: MUST NOT is probably too strong here; SHOULD NOT with this rationale might be better. The problem that this is trying to address is the possibility that someone sends an identifiable Sapling amount to a user; then, if that user's wallet has auto-migration turned on, that identifiable amount could be spent & revealed to the adversary, linking the targeted user to the transaction spending those funds.

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate on that more? You mention auto-migration as an element. So... is it that the adversary sends X ZEC to a sapling address, then waits for that X ZEC to cross the turnstile to orchard during auto-migration? If so, I don't understand how that gives the adversary information about who the targeted user is. 
I also don't see what that has to do with not spending funds from two pools at once does. 
But if I assume _no_ auto-migration, and if I imagine the victim is _paying_ the adversary in some agreed upon transaction, then yes, I suppose if a very unique amount is given from adversary to victim up front, and that same amount comes from one pool while the balance comes from another pool in the transaction, then I guess the adversary has now 'learned' that their victim likely owns the address they sent ZEC to. That seems somewhat contrived though. Possible, yes. But the adversary would have to already have a really good idea about the address correlation with one of their 'customers' that would likely send it back to him/her.

In order to maintain the integrity of IVK guarantees, wallets should not generate
unified addresses that contain internal receivers, nor expose internal receivers
(such as those used for auto-shielding and change outputs) in any way.

Open questions:

> * should there be an auto-migration option from Sapling to Orchard?

Reviewer 3: IMO, no. Doing so would drain the sapling pool. But plenty of sapling-only addresses are still out there, and sending them ZEC shouldn't require a turnstile crossing when it can be avoided. A balance (maybe not 50/50, but _some_ target balance) of ZEC between the pools allows folks with either receiver to be paid while minimizing the risk of crossing a turnstile.

# str4d notes

If we want to have both automatic and opportunistic shielding, and keep the two
indistinguishable, then we can't auto-shield when the transparent balance reaches
some threshold (otherwise opportunistic would either never be used, or would be

> identifiable when it uses the balance below the threshold).

Reviewer 3: Avoiding external discernment of auto-shielding vs. opportunistic shielding is another one of those areas where maybe the targeted or paranoid want to hide that information, but the average user that just wants their ZEC to show up under their 'spendable balance' as soon as they receive it will be disappointed if it's not available because of some seemingly arbitrary timeout. And asking them to push a Shield button to expedite it is an extra step that payment apps they're used to don't require. So I say, any funds get auto-shielded asap, provided their value significantly exceeds the ZIP-317 cost of movement.

Reviewer 4: This is why auto-shielding is specified to be able to have an "always on" option, where each shielding transaction doesn't have to be approved individually.

  the wallet), as the auto-shielding transaction is not directly triggered by payment
  receipt.

- If the user makes a shielding transaction in the meantime, we opportunistically
  shield, without it being clearly not an auto-shielding transaction.

- If a wallet is offline for a long time, then it would likely auto-shield as soon as
  it finishes syncing. This maybe isn't enough to reveal that the wallet came online,
  except that it _might_ result in auto-shielding transactions for multiple
  transparent addresses being created at the same time. So we might want to
  special-case this?

Properties we want from auto-shielding:

- Auto-shielding transactions MUST NOT shield from multiple transparent receivers in
  the same transaction.
  - Doing so would trivially link diversified UAs containing transparent receivers.

Properties we want from auto-migration:

- Receipt of a shielded payment MUST NOT trigger any on-chain behaviour (as that
  reveals transaction linkability).

Both auto-shielding and auto-migration are time-triggered actions, not
receipt-triggered actions. An auto-shielding or auto-migration transaction MUST NOT

> be created as a direct result of a payment being received.

Reviewer 3: Not directly related to this paragraph, but a thought: two wallet could theoretically enter a ZEC-destructive war. If one wallet does auto-migration to Orchard while another other wallet on the same account has a goal to maintain a balance between sapling and orchard, these two wallets may continually auto-spend across pools till fees deplete the account.
For this reason, IMO _automatically_ moving funds across shielded pools (either direction) is a high risk thing. Either do it as part of another transaction or only by explicit user gesture.
I think this should be called out to prevent two wallet apps from fighting.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand this comment. Do you mean two wallet apps sharing the same seed? That's something that a user should NEVER do.

Along those lines, I think that we should have an explicit section in this ZIP intended for wallet users, in addition to all the information that's intended for wallet developers. Now, this probably can't be expressed as explicit directives, but what we should do instead is define a number of user profiles with different threat models, and describe the threat model that they should consider when using a wallet that follows the ZIP 315 directives.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I'm talking about two wallets with the same seed. I've never heard the suggestion that I shouldn't sync two wallets with the same seed. I can't imagine why. When you say two wallet _apps_ are you specifically saying a user should not trust _two vendors_ of apps with the same seed, or are you saying I shouldn't even have one vendor's app installed on two devices with the same seed?

I don't see the danger either way. A compromise of either device or a rogue app can result in loss of your ZEC. Two devices or two apps, double the risk. But in such a case, the ZEC will be stolen whether the seed phrase also appears on another device or not.
And I for one have found it useful many times to have access to my Zcash from multiple devices.

Both of these are opportunistic: if the user's wallet is making a transaction in
which one of these actions would occur anyway, then the wallet takes the opportunity
to migrate as much as it would do if it were generating an autoshielding transaction.
This both saves on a transaction, and removes the need for any kind of transparent
change address within UAs.

TODO: what pool should change go to?

> * Proposal: the most recent pool already involved in the transaction.

Reviewer 3: How about the pool(s) that the notes originally came from? If a shielded pool balancing wallet spends from both pools, change could go to both pools, optimized to get closer to whatever that wallet is configured to target as the ideal balance across pools.

Wallet Recovery
---------------

In the case where we are recovering a wallet from a backed-up mnemonic phrase,
and not from a wallet.dat, we don't have enough information to figure out what
receiver types the user originally used when deriving each UA under an account.
We have a similar issue if someone exports a UFVK, derives an address from it,
and has a payment sent to the address: zcashd will detect the payment, but has

> no way to figure out what address it should display in the UI. A wallet could

Reviewer 3: If the problem is what address to show as the receiving address in an incoming transaction, my first question is why would the user care to see any of the various forms of their own address. Isn't it enough to know it's coming in to their wallet?
But I actually have a doc that describes how this could be useful, but without having to deal with this problem. But it relies on off-chain data, and your problem statement begins with supposing wallet.dat isn't available. Without the off-chain data, my spec would be limited to giving the timestamp at which the sender first received the address to use, based on time-based diversifiers being given every time a receiving address is handed out. My data file will tie that diversifier index to the contact in the address book that was given the receiving address for absolute correlation. But without that file, we still could say "you received payment from someone using an address you generated on [some date/time]".

Reviewer 4: The main reason would be for when a user provides distinct diversified addresses to different third parties; in this case, the address encodes some information about who the payment might have come from (or at least who might have had access to that particular address.)

There should definitely be a section here that discusses UX around diversified addresses, if there isn't already.

Reviewer 3: Right. I agree that can be useful. But as the user isn't likely to keep offline or hand-written copies of each of these diversified addresses that they hand out, they'll be relying on the wallet software to help them correlate incoming payments with those addresses or rather the people or places that observed those addresses. So whether the wallet can show the original unified address or just one of the receivers doesn't impact the wallet's ability to draw those correlations, IMO.

  about when this receiver may have been first used, show the UA
  corresponding to the most recent receiver types policy that includes the
  receiver's type.
- As part of this, we're also going to change the "Sapling receiver to
  UfvkId" logic to trial-decrypt after trying internal map, so that we will
  detect all receivers linked to UFVKs in the wallet, not just receivers in
  addresses generated via z_getaddressforaccount. The internal map lookup
  is then just an optimisation (and a future refactor to have Orchard do
  the same is possible, but for now we will only trial-decrypt so we don't
  need to refactor to access the Rust wallet). TODO: express this in a less
  zcashd-specific way.

TODO: Mention recommendations (not requirements) of receiver types based on
settled ('accepted') network upgrades, as defined in §3.3 of the
Zcash Protocol Specification, at the time of the release of the wallet.

TODO: Rationale subsection explaining why earliest block height at detection
and the rules/recommendations in place at that block height are preferred
over showing different UAs at different heights

References
==========

> .. [#RFC2119] `RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html>`_

Author: ```suggestion
.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
```

> .. [#zip-0203] `ZIP 203: Transaction Expiry <zip-0203.rst>`_

Author: ```suggestion
.. [#zip-0203] `ZIP 203: Transaction Expiry <zip-0203.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0317] `ZIP 317: Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism <zip-0317.rst>`_
```

Rationale for the given numbers of confirmations
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for choosing three confirmations for trusted TXOs is that
empirically, reorgs are usually less than three blocks.

The consequences of attempting to spend a trusted TXO may be less severe in the
case of a rollback than the consequences of attempting to spend an untrusted TXO.
The value received from a trusted TXO should always be recoverable, whereas
recovering value received from an untrusted TXO may require the user to request
that funds are re-sent.

Categories of TXOs according to spendability
--------------------------------------------

A TXO is *spendable*, relative to a given block chain and wallet state,
if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the TXO is unspent;
* the TXO is not committed to be spent in another transaction created
  by this wallet; and
* the wallet has the TXO's spending key (for whatever protocol the TXO uses).

A TXO is *confirmed-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and
wallet state, if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

* the wallet is synchronized; and

> * the TXO is spendable; and

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* the TXO is known-spendable; and
```

  balance;
* if the wallet is not synchronized, the confirmed-spendable balance
  will be zero.

If auto-shielding is disabled, the wallet MAY report shielded and
transparent balances separately. If it does so, it MUST make clear
whether each reported balance corresponds to a confirmed-spendable,
pending, or total subset of funds.

Rationale for reporting of balances
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If auto-shielding is disabled, then separate shielded and transparent
balances (and potentially, for expert users, separate shielded balances
per pool) can constitute useful information. If auto-shielding is enabled
then the wallet can and will automatically spend transparent TXOs in
order to shield them, and so transparent TXOs need to be presented as
pending, not as part of the balance spendable by the user.

TODO: The specification of balance reporting is intended to give the user
visibility into the operation of auto-shielding, opportunistic shielding,
and pool migration/usage. (Does the spec satisfy this?)

Reporting of transactions
-------------------------

If a transaction includes watch-only received TXOs, its watch-only incoming

> balance MUST be reported separately to any potentially spendable balance.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
balance MUST be reported separately to any potentially known-spendable balance.
```

    trying to spend some of the same TXOs.

* Whether the transaction is coinbase

* For coinbase transactions, the amounts / destination addresses / memos of
  shielded outputs

* Orchard flags (enableSpends/enableOutputs)

  * Under normal circumstances these only depend on whether the transaction
    is coinbase.

Linkability of transactions or addresses
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Motivation for choices reducing linkability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We want to support creating unlinkable addresses, in order that a user can
give different addresses to different counterparties, in such a way that the
counterparties (even if they collude) cannot tell that the addresses were
provided by the same or distinct users.

If multiple UTXOs are received at the same transparent address, it is safe
to shield them all in the same transaction, because that is not leaking
additional information.

UTXOs received on different transparent receivers SHOULD NOT be shielded
in the same transaction. Ideally, when they are shielded in separate
transactions, this should be done in such a way that the timing of those
transactions is not linkable.

> When spending transparent UTXOs, they SHOULD only be sent to an internal
> shielded receiver belonging to the wallet.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When spending transparent UTXOs, they SHOULD only be sent to an internal
shielded receiver belonging to the wallet, except when they are generated
and spent ephemerally as part of a ZIP 320 transfer [#zip-0320]_.
```

A wallet MUST NOT send funds to a transparent address unless all of the
source funds come from shielded pools, and this SHOULD be a single shielded
pool.

We want to minimize pool crossing.

Anchor selection
''''''''''''''''

A wallet SHOULD choose an anchor a number of blocks back from the head of the
chain equal to the trusted confirmation depth. That is, if the current block
is at height H, the anchor SHOULD reflect the final treestate of the block at

> height H-3.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
height H-3.

TODO: Define a parameter for this depth, and then RECOMMEND a value of 3.
```

Rationale for anchor selection
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

* If the chain rolls back past the block at which the anchor is chosen, then
  the anchor and the transaction will be invalidated. This is undesirable
  both for reliability, and because the nullifiers of spent shielded notes
  will have been revealed, linking this transaction to any future transactions
  that spend those notes.
* On the other hand, it is undesirable to choose an anchor too many blocks
  back, because that prevents more recently received shielded notes from
  being spent.
* Using a fixed anchor depth (as opposed to a different depth depending on
  whether or not we are spending trusted shielded notes) avoids leaking
  information about whether or not the shielded notes we spent were
  trusted.

Note selection
''''''''''''''

> TODO: consider what we should do when nullifiers are revealed in a transaction
> that is then invalidated. Should those notes be prioritized to be spent soon,
> or should they be used in a note management tx?

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
TODO: recommend that when nullifiers are revealed in a transaction that is then
invalidated (or revealed in some other detectable way), they SHOULD be used in
a note management tx to avoid linking the invalidated tx with some arbitrary
future tx. Provided that there are no transparent outputs leaving this wallet's
control, the same arities and transparent outputs SHOULD be preserved, which
also avoids revealing whether the user changed their mind about whether to send
the original semantic transaction.
```

  UfvkId" logic to trial-decrypt after trying internal map, so that we will
  detect all receivers linked to UFVKs in the wallet, not just receivers in
  addresses generated via z_getaddressforaccount. The internal map lookup
  is then just an optimisation (and a future refactor to have Orchard do
  the same is possible, but for now we will only trial-decrypt so we don't
  need to refactor to access the Rust wallet). TODO: express this in a less
  zcashd-specific way.

TODO: Mention recommendations (not requirements) of receiver types based on
settled ('accepted') network upgrades, as defined in §3.3 of the
Zcash Protocol Specification, at the time of the release of the wallet.

TODO: Rationale subsection explaining why earliest block height at detection
and the rules/recommendations in place at that block height are preferred
over showing different UAs at different heights

References
==========

.. [#BCP14] `Information on BCP 14 — "RFC 2119: Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" and "RFC 8174: Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119 Key Words" <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>`_
.. [#zip-0203] `ZIP 203: Transaction Expiry <zip-0203.rst>`_

> .. [#zip-0317] `ZIP 317: Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism <zip-0317.rst>`_

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
.. [#zip-0317] `ZIP 317: Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism <zip-0317.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0320] `ZIP 320: Defining an Address Type to which funds can only be sent from Transparent Addresses <zip-0320.rst>`_
```

external transactions as trusted, allowing their received TXOs also to be
classified as trusted TXOs.

A wallet SHOULD have a policy that is clearly communicated to the user for
the number of confirmations needed to spend untrusted and trusted TXOs
respectively. The following confirmation policy is RECOMMENDED:

* 10 confirmations, for untrusted TXOs;
* 3 confirmations, for trusted TXOs.

Rationale for the given numbers of confirmations
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for choosing three confirmations for trusted TXOs is that
anecdotally, reorgs are usually less than three blocks.

The consequences of attempting to spend a trusted TXO may be less severe in the
case of a rollback than the consequences of attempting to spend an untrusted TXO.
The value received from a trusted TXO should always be recoverable, whereas
recovering value received from an untrusted TXO may require the user to request
that funds are re-sent.

Categories of TXOs according to spendability
--------------------------------------------

A TXO is *known-spendable*, relative to a given block chain and wallet state,
if and only if all of the following are true in that state:

> * the TXO is unspent at the wallet's view of the chain tip, and that view is
>   reasonably up-to-date;

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* the TXO is unspent at the wallet's view of the chain tip, and that view is
  reasonably up-to-date;

  TODO: consider undoing the up-to-date part, as when combined with the
  definition of balance below, it causes wallet balance to drop to zero in
  the short window between opening and updating the wallet's chain tip view.
```

  Title: Best Practices for Wallet Handling of Multiple Pools
  Owners: Daira Hopwood <daira@electriccoin.co>
          Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Wallet
  Discussions-To: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/447>
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/issues/>

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

The terms below are to be interpreted as follows:

Auto-shielding
    The process of automatically transferring transparent funds to the most recent
    shielded pool on receipt.

Auto-migration
    The process of automatically transferring shielded funds from older pools to the
    most preferred (usually the most recent) pool on receipt.

TODO: add definitions of opportunistic shielding and migration.

TODO: "confirmed", "partially confirmed"

Motivation
==========

The aim of this ZIP is to provide wallet developers with a set of best practices by

> which they can minimize the leakage of information when constructing transactions.

Author: ```suggestion
which they can minimize the leakage of information and maximize their privacy when
constructing transactions.
```

Author: The goals being to have security and privacy best practices supported by default when handling funds and transactions as the user's agent, so that the user is not obliged by default to juggle all of the things.

This includes best practices for:

* how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 key tree and Unified Addresses;
* when to use external or internal keys/addresses;
* sharing addresses and viewing keys;
* sending and receiving funds;
* migrating funds between pools.

Requirements
============

User consent
------------

The guiding principle of these requirements is that users must explicitly consent

> to each instance of information being revealed by the wallet.

Author: ```suggestion
to each instance of information being revealed in a transaction by the wallet.
```

As is true for consent in general, a user may give blanket consent to reveal a
particular kind of information, and must always be able to revoke consent to
reveal such information in the future. The specifications below describe some
situations in which blanket consent may be inappropriate.

Long-term storage of funds
--------------------------

It is RECOMMENDED that wallets only hold funds as shielded in the long-term;

> that is, they automatically shield incoming transparent funds.

Author: ```suggestion
that is, if a wallet supports receiving transparent funds, then it SHOULD
automatically shield such funds.
```

Author: Add some motivation either here or in the Motivation section.

E.g. the note anonymity set over time is maximized.

The remainder of this specification assumes a wallet that follows this
recommendation, except where explicitly noted.

Trusted and untrusted notes

> ---------------------------

Author: Explain that this section is primarily describing wallet-internal concepts rather than user-visible concepts.

  handling.

Wallets can then require that untrusted notes need more confirmations before
they become spendable than trusted notes. This provides an improved trade-off
between latency on the one hand, and reliability and safety on the other.

Wallets MAY enable users to mark specific external transactions as trusted,
allowing their received notes to be spent more quickly.

A wallet SHOULD have a policy that is clearly communicated to the user for
the number of confirmations needed to spend untrusted and trusted notes
respectively. The following confirmation policy is RECOMMENDED:

* 10 confirmations, for untrusted notes;
* 3 confirmations, for trusted notes.

A note is *confirmed spendable* if and only if the wallet has its spending
key, and:

* it is a trusted note that has at least the required confirmations for trusted
  notes; or
* it is an untrusted note that has at least the required confirmations for
  untrusted notes.

A note is *unconfirmed spendable* if and only if the wallet has its spending
key, and it is not confirmed spendable.

A note is *watch-only* if and only if the wallet has its full viewing key
but not its spending key.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Anchor selection
----------------

TODO: choose anchors at the trusted confirmation depth. This avoids leaking information about whether or not we spent trusted notes.

```

same policy.

Unedited
--------

Wallets MUST report at least separate shielded and transparent balance.

If auto-shielding or auto-migration is off, then wallets MAY report separate
balances for each shielded pool and for transparent balance.

If the wallet never supports a given pool, it can obviously omit balances for that
pool.

If auto-shielding is on, transparent funds should be reported in "balance unavailable
to spend".

Wallets SHOULD separately report the balances of funds that are immediately
spendable, and any remaining funds that are expected from unconfirmed or
partially confirmed transfers.

TODO: make this more precise in terms of the following categories:

* Funds at rest (not involved in any not-fully-confirmed transfer)
* Outgoing funds to an external source (might come back if the tx doesn't go through)
* Incoming funds from an external source
* Funds we are sending to ourself.

Rationale
'''''''''

The specification of balance reporting is intended to give the user visibility
into the operation of auto-shielding, opportunistic shielding, and pool migration/usage.

Linkability of transactions or addresses
----------------------------------------

> 

Author: Dusting attack mitigation

no way to figure out what address it should display in the UI. A wallet could
store this information in the memo field of change outputs, but that adds a
bunch of coordination to the problem, and assumes ongoing on-chain state
storage.

- If the receiver matches an address that the wallet knows was derived via
  z_getaddressforaccount, show that UA as expected (matching the receiver
  types the user selected).
- If the receiver matches a UFVK in the wallet, and we are looking it up
  because we detected a received note in some block, show the UA with the
  default receiver types that zcashd was using as of that block height
  (ideally the earliest block height we detect), and cache this for future
  usage.
- For zcashd's current policy of "best and second-best shielded pools, plus
  transparent pool", that would mean Orchard, Sapling, and transparent for
  current block heights.
- For each release of a wallet, the wallet should specify a set of receiver
  types and an associated range of block heights during which the wallet
  will, by default, generate unified addresses using that set of receiver
  types.
- For zcashd we know how the policy evolves because each zcashd release has

>   an approximate relase height and EoS height that defines the window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  an approximate release height and EoS height that defines the window.
```

- Subsequent releases of a wallet should not retroactively change their
  policies for previously defined block height ranges.

> - If the receiver type for a note received at a given type is not a member

Reviewer: > at a given type

Type? Time?

Author: Time.

  of the set of receiver types expected for the range of block heights, the
  policy corresponding to the nearest block height range that includes that

>   receiver type should be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  receiver type SHOULD be used.
```

- If the receiver matches a UFVK in the wallet, and we have no information
  about when this receiver may have been first used, show the UA
  corresponding to the most recent receiver types policy that includes the
  receiver's type.
- As part of this, we're also going to change the "Sapling receiver to
  UfvkId" logic to trial-decrypt after trying internal map, so that we will
  detect all receivers linked to UFVKs in the wallet, not just receivers in
  addresses generated via z_getaddressforaccount. The internal map lookup
  is then just an optimisation (and a future refactor to have Orchard do
  the same is possible, but for now we will only trial-decrypt so we don't

>   need to refactor to access the Rust wallet).

Reviewer: Maybe express in a more generic manner that is less zcashd-specific?

>   Title: Best Practices for Wallet Handling of Multiple Pools

Reviewer 7: We should change this to reflect the broader scope of this document, and also to allow this to become the living spec for wallets to refer to e.g. for fees:
```suggestion
  Title: Best Practices for Wallets
```

    to the most preferred (usually the most recent) pool as part of a user-initiated
    transaction.

Transaction output (TXO)
    An output (transparent TXO or note) of a transaction on the consensus block chain
    or in the mempool visible to a wallet.

Motivation
==========

Zcash wallets have to serve two purposes as a user agent:

* to manage the economic actions dictated by the user;
* to manage the privacy implications of these actions.

The goal of this ZIP is to document security and privacy best practices when handling
funds and transactions as the user's agent. These best practices are intended to
provide as much privacy as is feasible by default, while still enabling the user's
desired transactions to occur, and exposing any privacy implications to the user so
that they have enough information to assess the consequences of their economic actions.

This ZIP covers best practices for:

* what information to display to the user about transactions and balances;
* how to handle interactions between the ZIP 32 key tree and Unified Addresses;
* when to use external or internal keys/addresses;
* sharing addresses and viewing keys;

> * sending and receiving funds;

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* sending and receiving funds (including fee selection);
```

* auto-shielding is always off;
* the user specifies a policy...

Auto-shielding MUST be one of:

* "must opt in or out" (zcashd will do this -- i.e. refuse to start unless the option
  is configured), or
* always on.

Auto-migration
--------------

Information leakage for transfers between pools
-----------------------------------------------

If no auto-migration, if you can satisfy a transfer request to Sapling from your
Sapling funds, do so.

The user's consent is needed to reveal amounts. Therefore, there should be
per-transaction opt-in for any amount-revealing transfer.

* there may be a compatibility issue for amount-revealing cross-pool txns that were
  previously allowed without opt-in

Don't automatically combine funds across pools to satisfy a transfer (since that
could reveal the total funds in some pool).

In order to maintain the integrity of IVK guarantees, wallets should not generate
unified addresses that contain internal receivers, nor expose internal receivers
(such as those used for auto-shielding and change outputs) in any way.

Open questions:

* should there be an auto-migration option from Sapling to Orchard?

# str4d notes

> If we want to have both automatic and opportunistic shielding, and keep the two

Reviewer 6: Opportunistic Shielded understood as "tailgating a z2z transaction and shield funds at the same time" Should be discouraged. 

Suppose a user withdraws a significant amount of funds from a centralized Transparent-only exchange to its wallet. That same user forgets about that transaction and sends a payment to a third party on a different matter, for example a coffee. The wallet proceeds to opportunistically shield the transparent funds by hoping to that coffee purchase. The user inadvertently ends up tying a shielding operation to a mundane purchase. The merchant knows who paid in person and knows the transaction ID and can see the transparent part of the transaction. 

Shielding transactions should always be on their own and never be tied up to other transactions.

Reviewer 7: > Opportunistic Shielded understood as "tailgating a z2z transaction and shield funds at the same time" Should be discouraged.

I agree, and we should clarify what we mean here.

I intend Opportunistic Shielding to be interpreted the same way we do in `zcashd`: if a wallet is willing to select from both transparent and shielded, and there is not sufficient shielded funds to fill the transaction (so transparent funds are _required_, and the transaction _must_ be t2z), and the user is willing to allow visible senders, then the wallet should take the opportunity to shield as much as it can.

This doesn't affect the current mobile SDK APIs, which explicitly _don't_ select transparent funds when creating transactions. They would not ever run Opportunistic Shielding, and instead only run Automatic Shielding via a separate process.

Reviewer 6: Cool that's great to know!

Something that comes to mind is that even though the user might be trying to seize the opportunity, a transparent balance as the one I described may have the same side effect even if the user has agreed to opportunistically shield. 

I'm specifically thinking of a scenario like this one. Let's say:

precondition A: the user withdrew a non-trivial amount of ZEC to a T-address from a centralized exchange that only supports T.

Precondition B: has other trivial transparent funds, that arrived after Precondition A funds.

Precondition C: funds in A and B are Confirmed and spendable

Assumption: Users might more likely remember recent transactions before older ones.

Intent:  User is trying to fulfill a payment and the whole amount can't be met with the available shielded funds. And uses Opportunistic Shielding to cover for the reminding funds for the transaction.

User expectation: the smallest amount will be used to complete the transaction amount I choose convenience over higher privacy because the amount I need is trivial to me. 

result: the wallet will try to spend the oldest funds first, picking the non-trivial UTXO and possibly disclosing a balance to a third party 

Is this scenario feasible? Am I missing other aspects that make it impossible?

If it is possible, should wallets warn about the UTXOs involved so that users can be aware of what could possibly be disclosed by the opportunistic shielding transaction?

Wallet Recovery
---------------

In the case where we are recovering a wallet from a backed-up mnemonic phrase,
and not from a wallet.dat, we don't have enough information to figure out what
receiver types the user originally used when deriving each UA under an account.
We have a similar issue if someone exports a UFVK, derives an address from it,
and has a payment sent to the address: zcashd will detect the payment, but has
no way to figure out what address it should display in the UI. A wallet could
store this information in the memo field of change outputs, but that adds a
bunch of coordination to the problem, and assumes ongoing on-chain state
storage.

- If the receiver matches an address that the wallet knows was derived via
  z_getaddressforaccount, show that UA as expected (matching the receiver
  types the user selected).
- If the receiver matches a UFVK in the wallet, and we are looking it up
  because we detected a received note in some block, show the UA with the
  default receiver types that zcashd was using as of that block height
  (ideally the earliest block height we detect), and cache this for future

>   usage.

Reviewer: TODO: Rationale subsection explaining why earliest block height at detection and the rules/recommendations in place at that block height are preferred over showing different UAs at different heights
